One of the ways that people can help is by adding to the knowledge base.
And that's really, basically anybody if the tooling is right.
And I'm the other way, I kind of want to ask you about your thoughts on this.
So you've had, and like you said, in government, and, um, you have big clients,
you had a lot of clients, but most of the disrupted and secrecy,
because of the nature of the relationship of the kind of things you're helping
them with. So that's one way to operate.
And another way to operate is more in the open where it's more consumer
facing. And so, uh, you know,
hence something like open cycle is born at some point or there's.
No, that that's a misconception.
Oh, well, let's go there. So what, uh,
what is open psych and how was it born to.
As I wanted to say, um, and I want to say each of them before the other,
so it's going to be difficult, but we'll come back to open psych in a minute.
But one of the terms of our contracts with all of our
customers and partners is
knowledge you have that is genuinely proprietary to you.
We will respect that.
We'll make sure that it's marked as proprietary to you in the psych knowledge
base. No one other than you will be able to see it if you don't want them to.
And it won't be used in inferences other than for you.
And so, however,
any knowledge which is necessary in building any applications
for you and with you, which is publicly available,
general human knowledge is not going to be proprietary.
It's going to just become part of the normal psych knowledge base.
And it will be, um, openly available to everyone who has access to psych.
So that's an important constraint that we never went back on. Even when we,
uh, got pushback from companies, which we often did,
who wanted to claim that almost everything they were telling us was proprietary.
Uh, so.
So there's a line between very domain specific companies,
specific stuff, and the general knowledge that comes from that.
Yes. Or if you imagine say it's an oil company,
there are things which they would expect any new petroleum engineer they
hired to already know. Right.
And it's not okay for them to consider that that is proprietary.
And that sometimes the company will say, well,
we're the first ones to pay you to represent that in psych. Yeah.
And our attitude is some polite form, tough.
The deal is this, take it or leave it. And in a few cases,
they've left it in most cases. Um, they'll,
they'll see our point of view and take it because that's how we've built the
psych system by, uh,
essentially tacking with the funding wins where people would fund
a project.
And half of it would be general knowledge that stay permanently as part of
psych. And.
With these partnerships,
it's not like a distraction from the main psych development. It's a.
Supportive small.
Distraction. It's a small, but it's not a complete one.
So you're adding to the knowledge base. Yeah.
Yes, absolutely. And we try to stay away from, um, projects, uh,
that would not have that property. Um,
so let me go back and talk about open psych for a second.
So I've had a lot of trouble
expressing, convincing other AI researchers,
how important it is to use an expressive representation language.
Like we do this higher order logic rather than just using some
triple store knowledge graph type, uh, representation.
Um, and so as an attempt to show them
why they needed something more, we said, oh, well,
we'll represent this unimportant projection or shadow
or subset of psych.
That just happens to be the simple binary relations,
the relation argument, one argument, two triples and so on. Um,
and then you'll see how much more useful it
is if you had the entire site system.
So it's all well and good to have the taxonomic relations
between terms like person and night and sleep and bed and
house and eyes and, and so on.
But think about how much more useful it would be if you also had all
the rules of thumb about those things. Like people sleep at night,
they sleep lying down, they sleep with their eyes closed.
They usually sleep in beds in our country. Uh, they sleep for hours at a time.
They can be woken up. They don't like being woken up and so on and so on.
And so it's that massive amount of knowledge, which is not part of open psych.
And we thought that all the researchers would then immediately immediately say,
oh my God,
of course we need the other 90% that you're not giving us let's
partner and license psych so that we can use it in our research.
But instead what people said is, oh,
even the bit you've released is so much better than anything we had,
we'll just make do with this. And so if you look,
there are a lot of robotics companies today, for example,
which use open psych as their fundamental ontology. Um,
and in some sense,
the whole world missed the point of open psych.
And we were doing it to show people why that's not really what they wanted.
And too many people thought somehow that this was psych or that this was in fact
good enough for them. And they never even bothered coming, um,
coming to us to get access to the full psych, but.
There's two parts to open sites.
So one is convincing people on the idea on the power of this general kind of
representation of knowledge and the value that you hold in having acquired that
knowledge and built it and continue to build it. And the other is the code base.
This is the code side of it.
So my sense of the code base that psycho psych is operating
with. I mean,
it has the technical debt of the three decades plus, right?
This is the exact same problem that Google had to deal with with the early
version of TensorFlow. It's still dealing with that,
that to basically break, uh,
compatibility with the past several times.
And that's only over a period of a couple of years, but they,
I think successfully opened up, it's very risky,
very gutsy move to open up TensorFlow and then pie torch and the
Facebook side.
And what you see is there's a magic place where you can find a
community. We could develop a community that builds onto on the system
without taking away any of, not any, but most of the value.
So most of the value that Google has is still a Google.
Most of the value that Facebook has still Facebook,
even though some of this major machine learning tooling is released into the
open. My question is not so much in the knowledge,
which is also a big part of open psych,
but all the different kinds of tooling.
So the there's the kind of all the kinds of stuff you can do on the knowledge
graph, knowledge base, whatever we call it, there's the inference engines.
So there,
there could be some probably are a bunch of proprietary stuff you want to kind
of keep secret and there's probably some stuff you can open up completely and
then let the community build up enough community where they develop stuff on top
of it. Yes,
there'll be those publications and academic work and all that kind of stuff.
And, uh, and also the tooling of adding to the knowledge base, right?
Like developing, you know,
there's an incredible Mo like there's so many people that are just really good
at this kind of stuff in the open source community.
So my question for you is like,
have you struggled with this kind of idea that you have so much value in your
company already, you've developed so many good things.
You have clients that really value your relationships,
and then there's this dormant giant open source community.
That as far as I know, you're not utilizing, is there,
there's so many things to say there,
but th there could be magic moments where the community builds up
large enough to where the artificial intelligence field that is
currently 99.9% machine learning is dominated by machine learning
has a face shift towards like, uh,
or at least in part towards more like what you might call symbolic AI,
this whole place where psych is like at the center of,
and then as you know,
that requires a little bit leap of faith because you're now surfing and there'll
be obviously competitors that will pop up and start making you nervous and all
that kind of stuff.
So do you think about the space of open sourcing some parts and not others,
how to leverage the community, all those kinds of things.
Th that's a good question. And I think you phrased it the right way, which is,
we're constantly struggling with the question of what to
open source, what to make public, what to even publicly talk about. Right.
Um, and it's
their enormous pluses and minuses to every
alternative.
And it's very much like negotiating a very treacherous
path part. Partly the analogy is like if you slip, uh,
you could make a fatal mistake,
give away something which essentially kills you or fail to give away something
which, um, who, um, failing to give it away, um, hurts you and so on.
So it is, uh, it is a very tough, tough question.
Usually what we have done with, uh,
people who've approached us to collaborate on research is to say,
we will make available to you the entire knowledge base
and executable copies of all of the code,
but only very,
very limited source code access.
If you have some idea for how you might improve something or work with us on
something. So let me also get back to one of the very,
very first things we talked about here, um, which was
separating the question of how could you get a computer to do this at all,
versus how could you get a computer to do this efficiently enough in real time?
And so one of the early lessons we learned
was that we had to separate the epistemological problem of what should the
system know,
separate that from the heuristic problem of how can the system reason
efficiently with what it knows.
And so instead of trying to pick one
representation language,
which was the sweet spot or the best trade-off point between
expressiveness of the language and efficiency of the language,
if you had to pick one knowledge, graphs would probably be associative.
Triples would probably be about the best you could do.
And that's why we started there. But, um, after a few years,
we realized that what we could do is we could split this and we could have
one nice clean epistemological level language,
which is this higher order logic.
And we could have one or more grubby,
but efficient heuristic level modules that
opportunistically would say, oh,
I can make progress on what you're trying to do over here.
I have a special method that will contribute a little bit toward a solution.
And so some subset of that. Exactly.
So by now we have over a thousand of these heuristic level modules and they
function as a kind of community of agents. And there's one of them,
which is a general theorem, prover and theory, in theory,
that's the only one you need, but in practice,
it always takes so long that you never want to call on it.
You always want these other agents to very efficiently reason through it.
It's sort of like if you're balancing a chemical equation,
you could go back to first principles. But in fact,
there are algorithms which are vastly more efficient,
or if you're trying to solve a quadratic equation,
you could go back to first principles of mathematics. But, um,
it's much better to simply recognize that this is a quadratic equation and apply
the binomial formula and stopped you get your answer right away and so on.
So think of these as like a thousand little experts that are
all looking at everything that site gets asked and looking at everything
that every other little agent has contributed almost like notes on a Blackboard
notes on a, um, a whiteboard, um,
and making additional notes when they think they can be helpful.
And gradually that community of agents gets an answer to your question,
gets a solution to your problem.
And if we ever come up in a domain application where psych is getting the
right answer, but taking too long, uh,
then what we'll often do is talk to one of the human experts and
say, uh, here's the, the set of reasoning steps that's like went through.
You can see why it took it a long time to get the answer.
How is it that you were able to answer that question in two seconds?
And occasionally you'll get an expert who just says,
well, I just know it, I just was able to do it or something. Um,
and then you don't talk to them anymore,
but sometimes you'll get an expert who says, um, well,
let me introspect on that. Yes,
here is a special representation we use just for
acquiesced chemistry equations,
or here's a special representation and a special technique,
which we can now apply to things in this special representation and so on.
And then you add that as the thousand and first HL heuristic level
module. And from then on, um, in any application,
if it ever comes up again, it will be able to contribute and so on.
So that that's pretty much one of the main ways in which, um,
psych has recouped this loss deficiency. Um,
a second important way is meta reasoning. So, um,
you can speed things up by focusing on removing
from the system till all it has left is like minimal knowledge needed to,
but that's the wrong thing to do, right? That would be like in a human,
extra painting part of their brain or something that's really bad. So instead,
what you want to do is give it meta-level advice,
tactical and strategic advice that enables it to reason about
what kind of knowledge is going to be relevant to this problem.
What kind of tactics are going to be good to take in trying to attack this
problem? When is it time to start trying to prove the negation of this thing?
Because I'm knocking myself out, trying to prove it's true and maybe it's false.
And if I just spend a minute, I can see that it's false or something.
So, so it's like dynamically pruning the graph to, to, to only like,
based on the particular thing you're trying to inf.
Yes.
And so by now we have about 150 of these
sort of like breakthrough ideas that have led to dramatic ups
in the inference process. You know, where one of them was this ELL,
HL split and lots of HL modules.
Another one was using meta and meta meta level reasoning to
reason about the reasoning that's going on and so on. Um, and you know,
150 breakthroughs may sound like a lot, but you know, if you divide by 37 years,
it's not as impressive.
So there's these kind of heuristic modules that really help improve the,
the inference.